[Music]
I welcome back and happy new year
this one is prompted by a question I
recently saw on social media about the
phase shift in minimum Phase II cues
such as green cue
and specifically how to interpret the
phase response curve but you can choose
to show if you want predictably many
people answer this question by saying
that the EQ delays certain frequencies
which results in phase shift but this
answer is problematic if you watched one
of my previous videos you'll know that a
minimum phase EQ can cancel itself out
if you run equal and opposite settings
and that this doesn't only cancel out
the boosts and cuts but also the phase
shifts if the phase shift is caused by
delay how does a zero latency VP plugin
that requires no plug-in delay
compensation managed to cancel itself
out this implies it can see into the
future when apply a negative delay so
there's my little demonstration I have a
burst of sine wave at 100 Hertz which I
simply rendered out of the provided j/s
tone generator plug-in when I've created
three copies interestingly the jas tone
generator always starts at full positive
excursion that's okay doesn't matter
now let's unmute the first copy right
click and invert the phase two quite
literally turn the waveform upside down
now it starts a low and for every peak
in the original there's a trough in the
copy
now when I press play we get silenced as
you'd expect
they cancel out perfectly okay let's
move on to the next one
and this time I'll bring up the nudge
dialogue now this being a 100 Hertz sine
wave logically one full cycle must take
10 milliseconds so if I notice this clip
to the right by 5 milliseconds we should
have shifted it by half a cycle
and sure enough the peaks and troughs
now line up with the inverted copy above
if I play this back we get a blip at the
start where the copy comes in later
and a blip at the end where the original
stops sooner but in between the two
signals cancel perfectly again
so let's think about that for a moment
we've achieved a 180 degree phase
reversal in two different ways here
we've done it with five milliseconds of
delay
but up here we've done it without any
the difference if this was a 200 Hertz
sine wave then inverting the polarity
would still cause a 180 degree phase
reversal
but delaying a 200 Hertz signal by five
milliseconds will actually shift it by a
full cycle it'll be shifted 360 degrees
and end up back in phase with the
original
this is why mixing delayed signals with
the original results in comb filtering
of course
but anyway there's the proof delaying
the signal always means phase shift
we can achieve 180 degrees of phase
shift just by turning the signal upside
down with no delay
okay now you're saying that inverting
the polarity is a special case and
doesn't help us to consider phase shift
from EQ
and yes I'll accept that
so let's try another method
is the final copy and I've added an
instance of re EQ to the track
let's delete all but a single band
and switch that to an allpass filter
this is an interesting filter type that
doesn't affect the frequency response at
all if I adjust the gain slider nothing
happens the frequency response just
remains flat
but if we tick show phase we can see
that this filter causes a 180 degree
phase shift at the target frequency
which then returns gradually to zero
phase either side
set this to exactly a hundred Hertz and
see what happens to our null at first
this seems very similar to the delay we
get a blip at the start and end but in
between is a perfect null the first clue
that it's not the same lies in the sound
let's listen to the delayed version
again that blip doesn't sound the same
as this one let's render that out again
so we can see what's happening to the
waveform
and lookout interesting this
that's the original underneath
and here's the version that's passed
through our all pass filter the
be fooled by the little ramp before the
start reaper simply joins the dots with
straight lines when zoomed in this tight
so this does indeed represent all zeroes
until the original waveform suddenly
starts hi
and the processed version also starts hi
so it seems there's no phase shift yet
but look how quickly it reverses
direction
and by the time the delayed copy comes
in it's already reversed its polarity
too much
in fact it seems to anticipate the
delayed copy and start to shift much
earlier in the cycle
so it can't be just delay right
otherwise the sine-wave would start five
milliseconds later
just like my delayed copy
but there's another interesting
this cycle here although already shifted
in phase is not quite yet at full
amplitude
this peak clearly Peaks higher than that
one
this I believe is filter ringing which
might sound a bit strange
but let's take a look at the end of the
test tone because interesting things
happen there to notice how the processed
version continues beyond the end of the
original wave
so continues beyond the end of the
delayed copy as well the filter rings on
for longer
in fact all filters ring linear phase
filters have equal ringing both before
and after the original impulse but
minimum phase filters like these only
ring after the impulse when actually in
theory they continue to ring infinitely
as they use feedback loops but that's
not relevant here the important point is
any system that takes time to stop
resonating at a certain frequency is
also going to need some time to start
resonating at that frequency so ringing
after the impulse is also matched by a
kind of ramp up at the start of the
impulse
which is I believe what we're seeing at
the start of the tone let's have another
look at the end because there's another
interesting phenomenon that you may have
noticed what's going on with that huge
downwards spike where the original
waveform stops
so let's consider the original waveform
and where it suddenly stops plunging
instantly from full excursion down to
zero that sudden downward spike is in
fact a short burst of all frequencies
if we consider that spike separately
from the 100 Hertz test tone
it's suddenly easy to see that the sign
wave has shifted in phase
while the spike has remained mostly
intact
of going from a positive value down to
zero that spike now goes from a negative
value to an even more negative value and
by the look of it almost doubles the
peak level of the wave so this actually
answers another common social media
question how come an EQ cut makes my
track louder which in fact should really
be how come phase shift can make my peak
levels higher but that might be a topic
for another day that's all for now
thanks for watching
[Music]